---
title: Vim as a Go IDE
weight: 9994
date: 2019-04-24
aliases:
  - /posts/vim-as-go-ide
  - /posts/vim-as-go-ide.html
---

# Vim as a Go (Golang) IDE using LSP and vim-go

It is 2019 and there are many great ways to write Go.
[Goland](https://www.jetbrains.com/go) is available for Intellij users, [Visual
Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com) (VSCode) is an incredibly enjoyable
editor / IDE, and of course, Vim. I am no Vim-purist, I think if you are more
productive in a different tool you should use it. But Vim remains a great
multi-purpose tool in 2019+. Traditionally, writing Go in Vim meant adding the
[vim-go](https://github.com/fatih/vim-go) plugin and coding away. Today,
`vim-go` remains a great plugin, but with the introduction of the [Language
Server Protocol](https://langserver.org) (LSP), there are new options worth
exploring.

{{< yblink T32yqetyy8s >}}

## The Past and The Present

Before LSPs, we _generally_ used [gocode](https://github.com/nsf/gocode), one of
the many tools packaged in `vim-go`. I personally had a love-hate relationship
with it. Namely, I found small changes in my environment could break it.
Additionally, Go `1.10` changed the binary package architecture breaking
`gocode`. Eventually the community moved to a
[fork](https://github.com/mdempsky/gocode). Then, Go `1.11` introduced [Go
modules](https://blog.golang.org/modules2019), so we moved to [another
fork](https://github.com/stamblerre/gocode). I am super thankful for the
awesomeness `gocode` brought us over the years. And I am very happy to see LSPs
providing convergence for how editors/IDEs support programming languages.

Go's official LSP is [gopls](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/gopls),
pronounced "go please".

vim-go `1.20` (April 22, 2019) introduced `gopls` support. Autocomplete now uses
`gopls` by default. `vim-go` commands `:GoDef` and `:GoInfo` can also be set to
use `gopls` if you add the following configuration.

```
let g:go_def_mode='gopls'
let g:go_info_mode='gopls'
```

This means, triggering omnifunc `<C-r><C-o>`, will make a call out to `gopls`.

While this is great, my **preference** is to limit the concerns of `vim-go` to
go-tool specific tasks such as `build`, `run`, `doc`, etc. Then, use an LSP
client to handle autocompletion and traversing code (e.g. going to a
definition). This maintains consistency in how these tasks are executed across
languages without new plugins. All you need is a language server. The breakdown
of responsibilities is as follows.

{{< img class="center"
src="https://octetz.s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/vim-go-resp.png" >}}

The two best client options are [Conquer of Completion
(coc.nvim)](https://github.com/neoclide/coc.nvim) and
[LanguageClient-neovim](https://github.com/autozimu/LanguageClient-neovim). I
recently switched to `coc.nvim`; that is what this tutorial covers. However,
LanguageClient-neovim is an excellent LSP client. Arguably more minimal (and
written in rust!). A benefit that sold me on `coc.nvim`'s is the ability to
leverage VSCode plugins.

The following details my Vim setup for Go in 2019 and why Vim is still my tool
of choice.

## Prerequisites

In order to follow this setup, you need to complete following.

* [Neovim](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/wiki/Installing-Neovim) installed

  * I use Neovim instead of Vim, however, much of this tutorial can be done in
    Vim 8. Should you choose Vim, configuration file locations will vary.

* [vim-plug](https://github.com/junegunn/vim-plug) installed

  * Manages Vim plugins in simple and minimal manner.
 
* [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/en/docs/install) installed

  * Required by the autocomplete tooling
    [coc.nvim](https://github.com/neoclide/coc.nvim).

* `$GOPATH` and `$GOBIN` set

  * See
    [https://golang.org/cmd/go/#hdr-Environment_variables](https://golang.org/cmd/go/#hdr-Environment_variables)
  * These are not required, but I like them, and the examples will use them.
  * You may also want to append `$GOBIN` onto your `$PATH`.

* `~/.config/nvim/init.vim` created

  * This is the `.vimrc` of Neovim.

## Installing vim-go

1. Edit `init.vim`.

    ```
    vim ~/.config/nvim/init.vim
    ```

    _`vim` maps to `nvim` in my system._

1. Add the `vim-go` plugin to the list of plugins managed by vim-plug.

    ```
    call plug#begin('~/.vim/plugged')

    " < Other Plugins, if they exist >

    Plug 'fatih/vim-go'
    call plug#end()
    ```

1. Save and exit Vim.

1. Run `PlugInstall` via Vim.

    ```
    vim +PlugInstall
    ```

    output:

    ```
    Updated. Elapsed time: 0.011105 sec.
    [=]

    - Finishing ... Done!
    - vim-go: Installed
    ```

1. Run `GoInstallBinaries` via Vim.

    ```
    vim +GoInstallBinaries
    ```

1. Verify tools are in $GOBIN.

    ```
    ls -la $GOBIN
    ```

    output:

    ```
    asmfmt
    errcheck
    fillstruct
    gocode
    gocode-gomod
    godef
    gogetdoc
    goimports
    golangci-lint
    golint
    gometalinter
    gomodifytags
    gopls
    gorename
    gotags
    guru
    iferr
    impl
    keyify
    motion
    ```

    _These binaries will be called by various commands in `vim-go`. Note that
    `gopls` was installed. Your LSP client will point to this binary._

1. Download a Go-based project.

    ```
    go get -d github.com/heptio/velero
    ```

    * `-d`: Instruct `go` to not install the package.

1. Enter the project's directory.

    ```
    cd $GOPATH/src/github.com/heptio/velero
    ```

1. Vim into a Go file.

    ```
    vim cmd/velero/main.go
    ```

1. Try some of the following commands to verify `vim-go` is working.

    * `:GoDoc` (or `shift + K`) over a symbol to get the documention in a Vim buffer.
    * `:GoDef` go to definition (soon to be replaced by LSP client).
    * `:GoDocBrowser` over a symbol to open godoc.org.
    * `:GoBuild` to build the project.

{{< img class="center" src="https://octetz.s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/vim-go.gif" >}}

## Installing coc.nvim

1. Edit `init.vim`.

    ```
    vim ~/.config/nvim/init.vim
    ```

1. Update your plugin list in `~/.config/nvim/init.vim` to contain the following. 


    ```
    call plug#begin('~/.vim/plugged')

    " < Other Plugins, if they exist >

    Plug 'fatih/vim-go'
    Plug 'neoclide/coc.nvim', {'do': 'yarn install --frozen-lockfile'}
    call plug#end()
    ```

1. Copy the following into your `init.vim`.

    ```
    " -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    " coc.nvim default settings
    " -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    " if hidden is not set, TextEdit might fail.
    set hidden
    " Better display for messages
    set cmdheight=2
    " Smaller updatetime for CursorHold & CursorHoldI
    set updatetime=300
    " don't give |ins-completion-menu| messages.
    set shortmess+=c
    " always show signcolumns
    set signcolumn=yes

    " Use tab for trigger completion with characters ahead and navigate.
    " Use command ':verbose imap <tab>' to make sure tab is not mapped by other plugin.
    inoremap <silent><expr> <TAB>
          \ pumvisible() ? "\<C-n>" :
          \ <SID>check_back_space() ? "\<TAB>" :
          \ coc#refresh()
    inoremap <expr><S-TAB> pumvisible() ? "\<C-p>" : "\<C-h>"

    function! s:check_back_space() abort
      let col = col('.') - 1
      return !col || getline('.')[col - 1]  =~# '\s'
    endfunction

    " Use <c-space> to trigger completion.
    inoremap <silent><expr> <c-space> coc#refresh()

    " Use `[c` and `]c` to navigate diagnostics
    nmap <silent> [c <Plug>(coc-diagnostic-prev)
    nmap <silent> ]c <Plug>(coc-diagnostic-next)

    " Remap keys for gotos
    nmap <silent> gd <Plug>(coc-definition)
    nmap <silent> gy <Plug>(coc-type-definition)
    nmap <silent> gi <Plug>(coc-implementation)
    nmap <silent> gr <Plug>(coc-references)

    " Use U to show documentation in preview window
    nnoremap <silent> U :call <SID>show_documentation()<CR>

    " Remap for rename current word
    nmap <leader>rn <Plug>(coc-rename)

    " Remap for format selected region
    vmap <leader>f  <Plug>(coc-format-selected)
    nmap <leader>f  <Plug>(coc-format-selected)
    " Show all diagnostics
    nnoremap <silent> <space>a  :<C-u>CocList diagnostics<cr>
    " Manage extensions
    nnoremap <silent> <space>e  :<C-u>CocList extensions<cr>
    " Show commands
    nnoremap <silent> <space>c  :<C-u>CocList commands<cr>
    " Find symbol of current document
    nnoremap <silent> <space>o  :<C-u>CocList outline<cr>
    " Search workspace symbols
    nnoremap <silent> <space>s  :<C-u>CocList -I symbols<cr>
    " Do default action for next item.
    nnoremap <silent> <space>j  :<C-u>CocNext<CR>
    " Do default action for previous item.
    nnoremap <silent> <space>k  :<C-u>CocPrev<CR>
    " Resume latest coc list
    nnoremap <silent> <space>p  :<C-u>CocListResume<CR>
    ```

    _The above is a smaller and slightly modified configuration based on
    [coc.nvim's
    recommendations](https://github.com/neoclide/coc.nvim/tree/3bdfdd2a86046d7b0938da6e0f940ec39f999bca#example-vim-configuration)._

1. Copy the following to tell `vim-go` to not map `gd` as its shortcut for go to definition.

    ```
    " disable vim-go :GoDef short cut (gd)
    " this is handled by LanguageClient [LC]
    let g:go_def_mapping_enabled = 0
    ```

	  _This is disabled to allow `coc.vim` to do the `gd` resolution._

1. Save `init.vim` and exit Vim.

1. Install the `coc.nvim` plugin.

    ```
    vim +PlugInstall
    ```

    output:

    ```
    Updated. Elapsed time: 0.027422 sec.
    [==]

    - Finishing ... Done!
    - vim-go: Already installed
    - coc.nvim: Installed
    ```

1. Open Vim.

1. Verify `coc.nvim` is working by running CocInfo.

    ```
    :CocInfo
    ```

    output:

    ```
    ## versions

    vim version: NVIM v0.3.4
    node version: v11.14.0
    coc.nvim version: 0.0.65
    term: rxvt
    platform: linux

    ## Error messages

    ## Output channel: highlight
    ```

1. Edit the CocConfig.

    ```
    :CocConfig
    ```

    _You may be prompted to install the JSON plugin. If you say yes, it will
    validate JSON based on structure and schema. Pretty cool!_

1. Setup the following [languageserver](https://github.com/neoclide/coc.nvim/wiki/Language-servers) in your configuration.

    ```
    {
      "languageserver": {
        "golang": {
          "command": "gopls",
          "rootPatterns": ["go.mod", ".vim/", ".git/", ".hg/"],
          "filetypes": ["go"]
        }
      }
    }
    ```

    _This assumes `gopls` is in your `$PATH`, if its not, point to it in your `$GOBIN`._

1. Restart Vim.

1. Open the project from before.

1. Verify `coc.nvim` is working by trying the following commands.

    * Test dot (`.`) completion in a function

      * autocomplete should pop up with suggestions from `[LS]` (Language Server).

    * Use `gd` to go to a definition.

      * you can use `ctrl + o` to go back.

    * Run `:CocList diagnostics` to see and search through all problems with the project.

      * `space + a` is a shortcut for this.

{{< img class="center" src="https://octetz.s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/coc-vim.gif" >}}

## Play Around!

Now your environment is setup and it is time to become familiar with `vim-go`
and `coc.nvim`.  Be sure to check the video at the top of this write-up for
examples of my shortcuts. `vim-go` and `coc.nvim` have great documentation. It
can be accessed in Vim with the following commands.

vim-go

```
:help vim-go
```

coc.nvim

```
:help coc-nvim
```
